Output documentation update (#20)
EBI-Metagenomics/assembly-analysis-pipeline: docs/output.md

# MGnify v6 assembly-analysis-pipeline output documentation

This document describes the different outputs produced by the [MGnify v6 assembly-analysis-pipeline](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/assembly-analysis-pipeline), which generates annotation outputs about taxonomy, function, and pathway information for input assemblies.

The pipeline functions on a per-assembly basis, and the outputs are shaped in a similar way. While most of the outputs are on a per-assembly basis, the pipeline does generate some summaries into different top-level summary files which are aggregated from all of the input assemblies. Assuming all the assemblies are from the same study, these summary files can be considered study-level summaries. In this documentation, the different contents of both per-assembly and per-study outputs will be described.

## Per-run output files

There are six general categories of results, which are separated into six different output directories by the pipeline, and each successful assembly should have all six of these directories:

```bash
├── qc
├── cds
├── taxonomy
├── functional-annotation
├── pathways-and-systems

> └── gff

Reviewer: nnotation-summary it is

```

As these results are per-assembly, most of the outputs use an assembly ID as a prefix. For the purposes of this documentation, we are using the run ID `ERZ12345`.

### qc

> The `qc` directory contains output files related to the quality control steps of the pipeline, from the contig length filtering by `seqkit`, to the quality assessment done by `QUAST`. The structure of the `qc` directory contains three output files and one output directory.

Reviewer: done

```bash
├── qc
│   ├── ERZ12345_filtered_contigs.fasta.gz
│   ├── ERZ12345.tsv
│   ├── multiqc_report.html
│   └── multiqc_data/
├── cds
├── taxonomy
├── functional-annotation
├── pathways-and-systems
└── gff
```

#### Output files

- **ERZ12345_filtered_contigs.fasta.gz**: This `fasta` file contains the filtered contigs after the removal of those that are shorter than 500 bases, and which have a proportion of ambiguous bases higher than 10%.
- **ERZ12345.tsv**: This `tsv` file contains the QUAST summary output, giving an assessment of the quality of the contigs of this assembly.

> - **multiqc_report.html**: This `html` file contains the `MultiQC` report for that assembly. It will combine outputs from `QUAST` and the different software versions used by the pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **multiqc_report.html**: This `html` file contains the `MultiQC` report for that assembly. It combines outputs from multiple tools, including `QUAST` (run both before and after quality control during assembly preprocessing), as well as records of the software versions used by the pipeline.
```

│   ├── pfam
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_pfam_summary.tsv.gz
│   │   └── ERZ12345_pfam_summary.tsv.gz.gzi
│   ├── go
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_go_summary.tsv.gz
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_go_summary.tsv.gz.gzi
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_goslim_summary.tsv.gz
│   │   └── ERZ12345_goslim_summary.tsv.gz.gzi
│   ├── eggnog
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_emapper_seed_orthologs.tsv.gz
│   │   └── ERZ12345_emapper_annotations.tsv.gz
│   ├── kegg
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_ko_summary.tsv.gz
│   │   └── ERZ12345_ko_summary.tsv.gz.gzi
│   ├── rhea-reactions
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_proteins2rhea.tsv.gz
│   │   └── ERZ12345_proteins2rhea.tsv.gz.gzi
│   └── dbcan
│       ├── ERZ12345_dbcan_cgc.gff.gz
│       ├── ERZ12345_dbcan_standard_out.tsv.gz
│       ├── ERZ12345_dbcan_overview.tsv.gz
│       ├── ERZ12345_dbcan_sub_hmm.tsv.gz
│       └── ERZ12345_dbcan_substrates.tsv.gz
├── pathways-and-systems
└── gff
```

#### Output files - interpro

This subdirectory contains the output of running InterProScan on the proteins of the assembly.

- **ERZ12345_interproscan.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains the output of InterProScan, containing the different InterPro annotations assigned to the set of proteins in the assembly.

> - **ERZ12345_interpro_summary.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains the summary counts of the different InterPro signatures that appear in the assembly.

Reviewer: One thing to add in the short term (hopefully) is a link the schemas we have in the toolkit.

For example:
```python
from mgnify_pipelines_toolkit.schemas.schemas import InterProSummaryRecord
print(json.dumps(InterProSummaryRecord.model_json_schema(), indent=2))
```
Get you this json schema
```json
{
  "description": "Model of a row in the InterPro summary file.",
  "properties": {
    "count": {
      "description": "Number of hits for the InterPro accession",
      "minimum": 0,
      "title": "Count",
      "type": "integer"
    },
    "interpro_accession": {
      "description": "InterPro accession ID",
      "examples": [
        "IPR123456"
      ],
      "pattern": "IPR\\d{6}",
      "title": "Interpro Accession",
      "type": "string"
    },
    "description": {
      "description": "Description of the InterPro domain",
      "title": "Description",
      "type": "string"
    }
  },
  "required": [
    "count",
    "interpro_accession",
    "description"
  ],
  "title": "InterProSummaryRecord",
  "type": "object"
}
```
@SandyRogers this could be a working item for your trip to 🇳🇴

```bash
├── qc
├── cds
├── taxonomy
├── functional-annotation
├── pathways-and-systems
│   ├── antismash
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_antismash.gbk.gz
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_antismash.gff.gz
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_merged.json
│   │   └── ERZ12345_antismash_summary.tsv.gz
│   ├── sanntis
│   │   └── ERZ12345_sanntis_concatenated.gff.gz
│   ├── genome-properties
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_gp.json.gz
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_gp.tsv.gz
│   │   └── ERZ12345_gp.txt.gz
│   ├── kegg-modules
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_kegg_modules_per_contigs.tsv.gz
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_kegg_modules_per_contigs.tsv.gz.gzi
│   │   ├── ERZ12345_kegg_modules_summary.tsv.gz
│   │   └── ERZ12345_kegg_modules_summary.tsv.gz.gzi
│   └── dram-distill
│       ├── ERZ12345_dram.tsv.gz
│       ├── ERZ12345_dram.html.gz
│       ├── ERZ12345_genome_stats.tsv.gz
│       └── ERZ12345_metabolism_summary.xlsx.gz
└── gff
```

#### Output files - antismash

> This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `AntiSMASH` on the proteins of the assembly, describing the detected BGCs and outputting them in multiple different formats.

Reviewer: I think they refer to `AntiSMASH` as `antiSMASH`

- **ERZ12345_antismash.gbk.gz**: This `gbk` file contains the different AntiSMASH annotations in the GenBank format.
- **ERZ12345_antismash.gff.gz**: This `gff` file contains the different AntiSMASH annotations in the GFF3 format.
- **ERZ12345_merged.json**: This `json` file contains the different AntiSMASH annotations in a JSON object file.
- **ERZ12345_antismash_summary.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains the different AntiSMASH labels in the proteins of the assembly.

#### Output files - sanntis

This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `SanntiS` on the proteins of the assembly, also describing the detected BGCs using this new machine learning-based tool.

> - **ERZ12345_sanntis.gff.gz**: This `gff` file contains the different SanntiS annotations in the GFF3 format.

Reviewer: Not for this PR probably, but having the GFF (mostly 9th column) spec is useful. For SanntiS we can just link to the repo.

```suggestion
- **ERZ12345_sanntis.gff.gz**: This `gff` file contains the different SanntiS annotations in the GFF3 format. The GFF3 specification can be found in the [tool repo](https://github.com/Finn-Lab/SanntiS?tab=readme-ov-file#ouput) 
```

#### Output files - genome-properties

> This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `Genome Properties` on the proteins of the assembly, describing different sets of protein signatures that exist in the set of proteins in the assembly, in three different formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `Genome Properties` on the proteins of the assembly. Genome properties is an annotation system whereby functional attributes can be assigned to a assembly, based on the presence of a defined set of protein signatures within that assembly. The results are available in three different formats.
```

I've taken this from the GP website, does it sound better?

- **ERZ12345_gp.json.gz**: This `json` file contains the different Genome Properties annotations in a JSON object file.
- **ERZ12345_gp.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains the different Genome Properties annotations in a tab-separated file.
- **ERZ12345_gp.txt.gz**: This `txt` file contains the different Genome Proeprties annotations in a simple text file.

#### Output files - kegg-modules

> This subdirectory contains the outputs of computing the different modules and pathsways that the set of KEGG KOs make up in the assembly. Completeness measures for different modules are computed based on this presence of KOs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This subdirectory contains the outputs of computing the different modules and pathways that the set of KEGG KOs make up in the assembly. Completeness measures for different modules are computed based on this presence of KOs using the [kegg-pathways-completeness-tool](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/kegg-pathways-completeness-tool)
```

- **ERZ12345_kegg_modules_per_contigs.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains the different KEGG modules and their completeness, including the contig they originate from.
- **ERZ12345_kegg_modules_per_contigs.tsv.gz.gzi**: This file is an index for the per-contig KEGG modules file.
- **ERZ12345_kegg_modules_summary.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains a summary of the different KEGG modules and their completeness for the whole assembly, not on a per-contig basis
- **ERZ12345_kegg_modules_summary.tsv.gz.gzi**: This file is an index for the summary KEGG modules file.

#### Output files - dram-distill

> This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `DRAM-distill` on some of the outputs of the pipeline, generating analysis and summary reports and visualisations for the annotations on a per-assembly basis, into four different files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `DRAM-distill` on the KO hits per contig, the InterProscan and run_DBCan. DRAM generates summary reports and visualisations for the annotations on a per-assembly basis, into four different files.
```

> This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `DRAM-distill` on some of the outputs of the pipeline, generating analysis and summary reports and visualisations for the annotations on a per-assembly basis, into four different files.

Reviewer 3: These are actually all the output files generated by DRAM. We initially decided to only select some, but in the end all of them are produced and left in ASA. So no need to mention "some" here.

> This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `DRAM-distill` on some of the outputs of the pipeline, generating analysis and summary reports and visualisations for the annotations on a per-assembly basis, into four different files.

Reviewer 3: I can't recall why the decision changed into leaving all outputs in the end - not sure if this simply got lost in the DRAM revamp (@mberacochea?) or if there was a deeper reason to it

I personally think that the xlsx and the stats aren't important... The stats would also need the taxonomy to be more meaningful (this file only contains the contig, #scaffolds and taxonomy - we don't even have the latter). The xlsx is a KEGG metabolism summary that is redundant to what we already show in other results subfolders (and with high likelyhood, even less modules than what we show in other results, as DRAM only summarises based on the main KEGG modules and loses a lot of information).

- **ERZ12345_dram.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains the product of `DRAM-distill` for the assembly, including functions that were detected.
- **ERZ12345_dram.html.gz**: This `html` file contains a heatmap visualisation of the detected functions by `DRAM-distill`.

> - **ERZ12345_genome_stats.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains a summary of the assembly quality, including number of scaffolds.

Reviewer 3: If we decide to keep this file, the only info contained in our executions are #scaffolds and taxonomy

- **ERZ12345_metabolism_summary.xlsx.gz**: This `xlsx` file is an Excel spreadsheet containing information about annotations that represent common metabolisms.

### gff

The `gff` directory contains a single file that summarises most of the functional annotations generated by the pipeline on a per-protein basis into a single file.

```bash
├── qc
├── cds
├── taxonomy
├── functional-annotation
├── pathways-and-systems
└── gff
    └── ERZ12345_annotation_summary.gff.gz
```

#### Output files

- **ERZ12345_annotation_summarygz**: This `gff` file contains an expansive and large summary of most of the functional annotations each protein has into a single GFF3 format file.

## Per-study output files

> The pipeline generated four different per-study output files that aggregate and summarise data, from successful assembly analysis runs to study-wide `MultiQC` reports. These are stored at the root of the study analysis directory.

Reviewer 2: I think I found a typo 🤔

> The pipeline generated four different per-study output files that aggregate and summarise data, from successful assembly analysis runs to study-wide `MultiQC` reports. These are stored at the root of the study analysis directory.

Reviewer 3: Typo - "generates"

### Successfully analyed assemblies

The IDs of assemblies that are successfully analysed are aggregated into a top-level file (`analysed_assemblies.csv `), which looks like this::

```
ERZ12345,success
ERZ56789,success
```

### MultiQC

Just like the pipeline generates MultiQC reports on a per-assembly basis, it also generates the same kind of report but on a per-study basis, which are located in the `multiqc/` directory.

### dram-distill

> Just like the pipeline generates `DRAM-distil` outputs on a per-assembly basis, it also generates the same kind of outputs on a per-study basis, which are located in the `dram-distill/` directory.

Reviewer 3: Typo: "DRAM-distill"

> Just like the pipeline generates `DRAM-distil` outputs on a per-assembly basis, it also generates the same kind of outputs on a per-study basis, which are located in the `dram-distill/` directory.

Reviewer 3: Maybe you could mention that the study-level summary is the result of concatenating assembly-level files.

# MGnify v6 assembly-analysis-pipeline output documentation

This document describes the different outputs produced by the [MGnify v6 assembly-analysis-pipeline](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/assembly-analysis-pipeline), which generates annotation outputs about taxonomy, function, and pathway information for input assemblies.

The pipeline functions on a per-assembly basis, and the outputs are shaped in a similar way. While most of the outputs are on a per-assembly basis, the pipeline does generate some summaries into different top-level summary files which are aggregated from all of the input assemblies. Assuming all the assemblies are from the same study, these summary files can be considered study-level summaries. In this documentation, the different contents of both per-assembly and per-study outputs will be described.

## Per-run output files

There are six general categories of results, which are separated into six different output directories by the pipeline, and each successful assembly should have all six of these directories:

```bash
├── qc
├── cds
├── taxonomy
├── functional-annotation
├── pathways-and-systems
└── gff
```

> As these results are per-assembly, most of the outputs use an assembly ID as a prefix. For the purposes of this documentation, we are using the run ID `ERZ12345`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As these results are per-assembly, most of the outputs use an assembly ID as a prefix. For the purposes of this documentation, we are using the assembly ID `ERZ12345`.
```

- **ERZ12345_gp.json.gz**: A JSON format file containing Genome Properties annotations
- **ERZ12345_gp.tsv.gz**: A `tsv` file containing Genome Properties annotations in a tab-separated format.
- **ERZ12345_gp.txt.gz**: A plain text file containing the Genome Properties annotations.

#### Output files - kegg-modules

This subdirectory contains results from evaluating which KEGG modules and pathways are represented in the assembly based on the presence of KEGG Orthologs (KOs). For each module, a completeness score is calculated depending on how many required KOs are detected.

- **ERZ12345_kegg_modules_per_contigs.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains the different KEGG modules and their completeness, including the contig they were found on.
- **ERZ12345_kegg_modules_per_contigs.tsv.gz.gzi**: This file is an index for the per-contig KEGG modules file.
- **ERZ12345_kegg_modules_summary.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains a summary of the KEGG modules and their completeness for the whole assembly, not on a per-contig basis.
- **ERZ12345_kegg_modules_summary.tsv.gz.gzi**: This file is an index for the summary KEGG modules file.

#### Output files - dram-distill

> This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `DRAM-distill` on the KO hits per contig, the InterProscan and run_DBCan. DRAM generates summary reports and visualisations for the annotations on a per-assembly basis, into four different files.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `DRAM-distill` on the KO hits per contig, the InterProScan and run_dbCan. DRAM generates summary reports and visualisations for the annotations on a per-assembly basis, and outputs four different files.
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This subdirectory contains the outputs of running `DRAM-distill` on the KO hits per contig, the InterProscan and run_dbCAN. DRAM generates summary reports and visualisations for the annotations on a per-assembly basis, into four different files.
```

- **ERZ12345_dram.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains the product of `DRAM-distill` for the assembly, including functions that were detected.
- **ERZ12345_dram.html.gz**: This `html` file contains a heatmap visualisation of the detected functions by `DRAM-distill`.
- **ERZ12345_genome_stats.tsv.gz**: This `tsv` file contains a summary of the assembly quality, including number of scaffolds.
- **ERZ12345_metabolism_summary.xlsx.gz**: This `xlsx` file is an Excel spreadsheet containing information about annotations that represent common metabolisms.

### gff

The `gff` directory contains a single file that summarises most of the functional annotations generated by the pipeline on a per-protein basis into a single file.

```bash
├── qc
├── cds
├── taxonomy
├── functional-annotation
├── pathways-and-systems
└── gff
    └── ERZ12345_annotation_summary.gff.gz
```

#### Output files

> - **ERZ12345_annotation_summarygz**: This `gff` file contains an expansive and large summary of most of the functional annotations each protein has into a single GFF3 format file.

Reviewer 4: We might want to have a table similar to this one: https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mettannotator?tab=readme-ov-file#data-sources

Reviewer: Yes, in another PR.

Reviewer: https://embl.atlassian.net/browse/EMG-8058
